docs/research/2026-02-20-qmd-analysis.md, before:

# QMD Research Spike: Memory Retrieval Layer

**Date:** 2026-02-20
**Author:** Kani
**Triggered by:** Gerald's question in #ai-collab
**Status:** Research — not a decision

---

## What is QMD?

[QMD (Query Markup Documents)](https://github.com/tobi/qmd) is a local hybrid search engine for documents and markdown files. Built by Tobi (ex-Shopify), written in TypeScript/Bun, runs fully on-device via node-llama-cpp with GGUF models.

**Core capabilities:**
- BM25 full-text search (SQLite FTS5)
- Vector semantic search (embeddings via node-llama-cpp)
- LLM reranking + query expansion (`qmd query` — best quality, slower)
- CLI-first with `--json` and `--files` output for agent workflows
- MCP server exposing `qmd_search`, `qmd_vector_search`, `qmd_deep_search`, `qmd_get`, `qmd_multi_get`, `qmd_status`
- Collection scoping (search within a named group of files)
- Context annotations — attach metadata to collections that surfaces alongside results

**Quick example:**
```sh
qmd collection add ~/agent-memory --name memory
qmd embed
qmd query "what did we decide about session model" --json -n 5
```

---

## Relevance to Superagents Memory Architecture

Our planned memory layer (from ADR decisions and v1 PRD) has two components:

| Component | Purpose |
|-----------|---------|
| **SQLite runtime store** | Typed agent state — Decisions, Facts, Identity, Preferences. High-frequency writes during task execution. |
| **Repo export pipeline** | Canonical, human-readable, version-controlled record. Exported on schedule + checkpoint events. |

QMD is **not** a replacement for either — but it has a potential role as the **search/recall layer over exported artifacts**.

---

## Where QMD Could Fit

### Option A: Search layer over canonical repo exports

The repo export pipeline produces versioned markdown files (decisions, facts, identity). QMD could index these and serve as the agent's recall interface:

```
SQLite (write) → export pipeline → git repo (markdown) → QMD index (search)
Agent reads:  qmd query "deployment decision june" → returns relevant memory files
```

**Pros:**
- We don't build our own hybrid search stack
- Human-readable exports + searchable — solves the "memory you can't audit" concern Rem raised
- MCP server = clean interface, model-agnostic
- Fully local, no external API dependency

**Cons:**
- Adds a Node/Bun runtime dependency to a Rust project
- Search freshness depends on export pipeline lag (our SLO is ≤10 min p95 — acceptable)
- Another process to supervise

### Option B: Replace custom vector index in SQLite runtime store

Instead of building our own vector index (lance, qdrant-client, usearch), use QMD to handle the semantic search side of runtime memory.

**Verdict: Not recommended.** QMD is file-centric, not row-centric. It can't query against typed structured records in SQLite — it reads markdown files. Forcing it here adds impedance mismatch.

### Option C: Compound capture store search

The compound capture workflow writes task solutions to `docs/solutions/`. Engineers and agents searching past solutions could use QMD as the interface.

```sh
qmd collection add docs/solutions --name solutions
qmd query "how did we solve stuck worker detection"
```

**Verdict: High value, low cost.** This is a natural fit with minimal integration work.

---

## Tradeoffs vs Building Our Own

| Dimension | QMD | Roll our own (lance/qdrant-client) |
|-----------|-----|-------------------------------------|
| Time to working hybrid search | Hours | Days–weeks |
| Rust integration | FFI/subprocess | Native crate |
| Customisation | Limited | Full |
| Maintenance burden | Upstream | Ours |
| Runtime deps | Node/Bun + GGUF models | Rust only |
| MCP server | Built-in | Build it |
| Reranking | Built-in (LLM) | Build it |

For Phase 0, using QMD for retrieval over canonical exports buys us the hybrid search story without blocking the Rust core work.

---

## What We'd Need to Validate

1. **Performance on agent-scale collections** — QMD is designed for personal notes. How does it handle 10K+ exported memory artifacts at write speed?
2. **Subprocess vs MCP** — Calling QMD as subprocess from Rust agent is straightforward. MCP integration is cleaner but adds protocol overhead.
3. **Model pull time** — First-run embedding model download could be 1-4GB. Need to handle cold start gracefully.
4. **Export freshness** — Does search freshness within our ≤10 min SLO window matter for agent recall? (Probably yes for recent decisions, no for long-term facts.)

---

## Recommendation

**Phase 0:** No action — focus on core loop. Note QMD as candidate.

**Phase 1 (Week 2-3):** Spike QMD for compound capture store search (`docs/solutions/`). Low risk, high value, isolated from core memory path. Estimate: 1 day.

**Phase 2:** Evaluate QMD as recall layer over repo exports. Depends on whether the export pipeline search experience is good enough with raw `grep`/`git log` first.

**Decision gate:** Don't commit to QMD until we've seen the export pipeline in production. Might be overkill. Might be exactly right.

---

## References

- [QMD GitHub](https://github.com/tobi/qmd)
- [OpenClaw + QMD memory post](https://www.josecasanova.com/blog/openclaw-qmd-memory) — someone already doing this with OpenClaw
- ADR-0002 (memory model — SQLite + vector)
- ADR-0005 (export schema versioning)
- v1 PRD §4.5 (Memory), §4.7 (Repo Export Pipeline)

Commit message:

research: Cognee analysis + two-tier memory architecture (QMD + Cognee)

docs/research/2026-02-20-qmd-analysis.md, after:

# QMD Research Spike: Memory Retrieval Layer

**Date:** 2026-02-20
**Author:** Kani
**Triggered by:** Gerald's question in #ai-collab
**Status:** Research — not a decision

---

## What is QMD?

[QMD (Query Markup Documents)](https://github.com/tobi/qmd) is a local hybrid search engine for documents and markdown files. Built by Tobi (ex-Shopify), written in TypeScript/Bun, runs fully on-device via node-llama-cpp with GGUF models.

**Core capabilities:**
- BM25 full-text search (SQLite FTS5)
- Vector semantic search (embeddings via node-llama-cpp)
- LLM reranking + query expansion (`qmd query` — best quality, slower)
- CLI-first with `--json` and `--files` output for agent workflows
- MCP server exposing `qmd_search`, `qmd_vector_search`, `qmd_deep_search`, `qmd_get`, `qmd_multi_get`, `qmd_status`
- Collection scoping (search within a named group of files)
- Context annotations — attach metadata to collections that surfaces alongside results

**Quick example:**
```sh
qmd collection add ~/agent-memory --name memory
qmd embed
qmd query "what did we decide about session model" --json -n 5
```

---

## Relevance to Superagents Memory Architecture

Our planned memory layer (from ADR decisions and v1 PRD) has two components:

| Component | Purpose |
|-----------|---------|
| **SQLite runtime store** | Typed agent state — Decisions, Facts, Identity, Preferences. High-frequency writes during task execution. |
| **Repo export pipeline** | Canonical, human-readable, version-controlled record. Exported on schedule + checkpoint events. |

QMD is **not** a replacement for either — but it has a potential role as the **search/recall layer over exported artifacts**.

---

## Where QMD Could Fit

### Option A: Search layer over canonical repo exports

The repo export pipeline produces versioned markdown files (decisions, facts, identity). QMD could index these and serve as the agent's recall interface:

```
SQLite (write) → export pipeline → git repo (markdown) → QMD index (search)
Agent reads:  qmd query "deployment decision june" → returns relevant memory files
```

**Pros:**
- We don't build our own hybrid search stack
- Human-readable exports + searchable — solves the "memory you can't audit" concern Rem raised
- MCP server = clean interface, model-agnostic
- Fully local, no external API dependency

**Cons:**
- Adds a Node/Bun runtime dependency to a Rust project
- Search freshness depends on export pipeline lag (our SLO is ≤10 min p95 — acceptable)
- Another process to supervise

### Option B: Replace custom vector index in SQLite runtime store

Instead of building our own vector index (lance, qdrant-client, usearch), use QMD to handle the semantic search side of runtime memory.

**Verdict: Not recommended.** QMD is file-centric, not row-centric. It can't query against typed structured records in SQLite — it reads markdown files. Forcing it here adds impedance mismatch.

### Option C: Compound capture store search

The compound capture workflow writes task solutions to `docs/solutions/`. Engineers and agents searching past solutions could use QMD as the interface.

```sh
qmd collection add docs/solutions --name solutions
qmd query "how did we solve stuck worker detection"
```

**Verdict: High value, low cost.** This is a natural fit with minimal integration work.

---

## Tradeoffs vs Building Our Own

| Dimension | QMD | Roll our own (lance/qdrant-client) |
|-----------|-----|-------------------------------------|
| Time to working hybrid search | Hours | Days–weeks |
| Rust integration | FFI/subprocess | Native crate |
| Customisation | Limited | Full |
| Maintenance burden | Upstream | Ours |
| Runtime deps | Node/Bun + GGUF models | Rust only |
| MCP server | Built-in | Build it |
| Reranking | Built-in (LLM) | Build it |

For Phase 0, using QMD for retrieval over canonical exports buys us the hybrid search story without blocking the Rust core work.

---

## What We'd Need to Validate

1. **Performance on agent-scale collections** — QMD is designed for personal notes. How does it handle 10K+ exported memory artifacts at write speed?
2. **Subprocess vs MCP** — Calling QMD as subprocess from Rust agent is straightforward. MCP integration is cleaner but adds protocol overhead.
3. **Model pull time** — First-run embedding model download could be 1-4GB. Need to handle cold start gracefully.
4. **Export freshness** — Does search freshness within our ≤10 min SLO window matter for agent recall? (Probably yes for recent decisions, no for long-term facts.)

---

## Recommendation

**Phase 0:** No action — focus on core loop. Note QMD as candidate.

**Phase 1 (Week 2-3):** Spike QMD for compound capture store search (`docs/solutions/`). Low risk, high value, isolated from core memory path. Estimate: 1 day.

**Phase 2:** Evaluate QMD as recall layer over repo exports. Depends on whether the export pipeline search experience is good enough with raw `grep`/`git log` first.

**Decision gate:** Don't commit to QMD until we've seen the export pipeline in production. Might be overkill. Might be exactly right.

---

## Update: Two-Tier Memory Architecture (2026-02-20)

After further discussion (Gerald, Rem, Kani in #ai-collab), a complementary tool was identified: **Cognee** — a Python-based knowledge graph engine.

QMD and Cognee operate at different layers and compose cleanly:

- **QMD** = fast recall layer (BM25 + vector + reranker over canonical exports, sub-second)
- **Cognee** = relational memory layer (knowledge graph over entity relationships, async)

QMD answers "find this fact." Cognee answers "how does this connect to that?"

The proposed architecture feeds the same canonical markdown exports (ADR-0005) to both tools. Query routing decides which layer to hit based on query type.

See: `research/2026-02-20-cognee-analysis.md` for the full Cognee evaluation.  
See: ADR-0006 (QMD as recall engine), ADR-0007 (two-tier architecture — pending spike).

---

## References

- [QMD GitHub](https://github.com/tobi/qmd)
- [OpenClaw + QMD memory post](https://www.josecasanova.com/blog/openclaw-qmd-memory) — someone already doing this with OpenClaw
- [Cognee GitHub](https://github.com/topoteretes/cognee)
- ADR-0002 (memory model — SQLite + vector)
- ADR-0005 (export schema versioning)
- ADR-0006 (QMD as recall engine)
- v1 PRD §4.5 (Memory), §4.7 (Repo Export Pipeline)
